federalist 70 the executive department
further considered
from the new york packet tuesday march
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
there is an idea which is not without
its advocates that a vigorous executive
is inconsistent with the genius of
republican government the enlightened
well-wishers to this species of
government must at least hope that the
supposition is destitute of foundation
since they can never admit its truth
without at the same time admitting the
condemnation of their own principles
energy in the executive is a leading
character in the definition of good
government it is essential to the
protection of the community against
foreign attacks it is not less essential
to the steady administration of the laws
to the protection of property against
those irregular and high-handed
combinations which sometimes interrupt
the ordinary course of justice to the
security of liberty against the
enterprises and assaults of ambition of
faction and of anarchy
every man the least conversant in roman
history knows how often that republic
was obliged to take refuge in the
absolute power of a single man under the
formidable title of dictator as well
against the intrigues of ambitious
individuals who aspired to the tyranny
and the seditions of whole classes of
the community whose conduct threatened
the existence of all government as
against the invasions of external
enemies who menaced the conquest and
destruction of rome
there can be no need however to multiply
arguments or examples on this head a
feeble executive implies a feeble
execution of the government a feeble
execution is but another phrase for a
bad execution and a government
ill-executed whatever it may be in
theory must be in practice a bad
government
taking it for granted therefore that all
men of sense will agree in the necessity
of an energetic executive it will only
remain to inquire what are the
ingredients which constitute this energy
how far can they be combined with those
other ingredients which constitute
safety in the republican sense and how
far does this combination characterize
the plan which has been reported by the
convention
the ingredients which constitute energy
in the executive are first unity
secondly duration thirdly an adequate
provision for its support fourthly
competent powers
the ingredients which constitute safety
in the republican sense are first a due
dependence on the people secondly a due
responsibility
those politicians and statesmen who have
been the most celebrated for the
soundness of their principles and for
the justice of their views have declared
in favor of a single executive and a
numerous legislature they have with
great propriety considered energy as the
most necessary qualification of the
former and have regarded this as most
applicable to power in a single hand
while they have with equal propriety
considered the latter as best adapted to
deliberation and wisdom and best
calculated to conciliate the confidence
of the people and to secure their
privileges and interests
that unity is conducive to energy will
not be disputed decision activity
secrecy and dispatch will generally
characterize the proceedings of one man
in a much more imminent degree than the
proceedings of any greater number and in
proportion as the number is increased
these qualities will be diminished
this unity may be destroyed in two ways
either by vesting the power in two or
more magistrates of equal dignity and
authority or by vesting it ostensibly in
one man subject in whole or in part to
the control and cooperation of others in
the capacity of counsellors to him
of the first the two consoles of rome
may serve as an example of the last we
shall find examples in the constitutions
of several of the states new york and
new jersey if i recollect right are the
only states which have entrusted the
executive authority wholly to single men
new york has no counsel except for the
single purpose of appointing to offices
new jersey has a council whom the
governor may consult but i think from
the terms of the constitution their
resolutions do not bind him
both these methods of destroying the
unity of the executive have their
partisans but the voters of an executive
council are the most numerous they are
both liable if not to equal to similar
objections and may in most lights be
examined in conjunction
the experience of other nations will
afford little instruction on this head
as far however as it teaches anything it
teaches us not to be enamored of
plurality in the executive
we have seen that the achaeans on an
experiment of two praetors were induced
to abolish one
the roman history records many instances
of mischief to the republic from the
dissensions between the consuls and
between the military tribunes who are at
time substituted for the consuls but it
gives us no specimens of any peculiar
advantages derived to the state from the
circumstance of the plurality of those
magistrates
that the dissensions between them were
not more frequent or more fatal is a
matter of astonishment until we advert
to the singular position in which the
republic was almost continually placed
and to the prudent policy pointed out by
the circumstances of the state and
pursued by the consuls of making a
division of the government between them
the patricians engaged in a perpetual
struggle with the plebeians for the
preservation of their ancient
authorities and dignities the consuls
who were generally chosen out of the
former body were commonly united by the
personal interests they had in the
defense of the privileges of their order
in addition to this mode of union after
the arms of the republic had
considerably expanded the bounds of its
empire it became an established custom
with the consuls to divide the
administration between themselves by lot
one of them remaining at rome to govern
the city and its environs the other
taking command in the more distant
provinces
these expedients must no doubt have had
great influence in preventing those
collisions and rival ships which might
otherwise have embroiled the peace of
the republic
by quitting the dim light of historical
research attaching ourselves purely to
the dictates of reason and good sense we
shall discover much greater cause to
reject than to approve the idea of
plurality in the executive under any
modification whatever
wherever two or more persons are engaged
in any common enterprise or pursuit
there was always danger of difference of
opinion if it be a public trust or
office in which they are clothed with
equal dignity and authority there is
peculiar danger of personal emulation
and even animosity
from either and especially from all
these causes the most bitter dissensions
are apt to spring
whenever these happen they lessen the
respectability weaken the authority and
distract the plans and operation of
those whom they divide
if they should unfortunately assail the
supreme executive magistracy of a
country consisting of a plurality of
persons they might impede or frustrate
the most important measures of the
government in the most critical
emergencies of the state and what is
still worse they might split the
community into the most violent and
irreconcilable factions adhering
differently to the different individuals
who compose the magistracy
men often oppose a thing merely because
they have no agency in planning it or
because it may have been planned by
those whom they dislike
but if they've been consulted and have
happened to disapprove opposition then
becomes in their estimation an
indispensable duty of self-love
they seem to think themselves bound in
honor and by all the motives of personal
infallibility to defeat the success of
what has been resolved upon contrary to
their sentiments
men of upright benevolent tempers have
too many opportunities of remarking with
horror to what desperate lengths this
disposition is sometimes carried and how
often the great interests of society are
sacrificed to the vanity to the conceit
and to the obstinacy of individuals who
have credit enough to make their
passions and their caprices interesting
to mankind
perhaps the question now before the
public may in its consequences afford
melancholy proofs of the effects of this
despicable frailty or rather detestable
vice in the human character
upon the principles of a free government
inconveniences from the source just
mentioned must necessarily be submitted
to in the formation of the legislature
but it is unnecessary and therefore
unwise to introduce them into the
constitution of the executive
it is here too that they may be most
pernicious
in the legislature promptitude of
decision is often are an evil than a
benefit
the differences of opinion and the
jarrings of parties in that department
of the government though they may
sometimes obstruct salutary plans yet
often promote deliberation and
circumspection and serve to check
excesses in the majority
when a resolution two is once taken the
opposition must be at an end that
resolution is a law and resistance to it
punishable but no favorable
circumstances palliate or atone for the
disadvantages of dissension in the
executive department here they are pure
and unmixed there is no point at which
they cease to operate they serve to
embarrass and weaken the execution of
the plan or measure to which they relate
from the first step to the final
conclusion of it they constantly
counteract those qualities in the
executive which are the most necessary
ingredients in its composition vigor and
expedition and this without any
counterbalance in good
in the conduct of war in which the
energy of the executive is the bulwark
of the national security everything
would be to be apprehended from its
plurality
it must be confessed that these
observations apply with principal weight
to the first case supposed that is to a
plurality of magistrates of equal
dignity and authority is scheme the
advocates for which are not likely to
form a numerous sect but they apply
though not with equal yet with
considerable weight to the project of a
council whose concurrence is made
constitutionally necessary to the
operations of the ostensible executive
an artful cabal in that council would be
able to distract and innervate the whole
system of administration if no such
cabal should exist the mere diversity of
views and opinions would alone be
sufficient to tincture the exercise of
the executive authority with a spirit of
habitual feebleness and deletoriness but
one of the weightiest objections to a
plurality in the executive and which
lies as much against the last as the
first plan is that it tends to conceal
faults and destroy responsibility
responsibility is of two kinds to
censure and to punishment
the first is the more important of the
two especially in an elective office
man in public trust will much often or
act in such a manner as to render him
unworthy of being any longer trusted
than in such a manner as to make him
obnoxious to legal punishment but the
multiplication of the executive adds to
the difficulty of detection in either
case
it often becomes impossible amidst
mutual accusations to determine on whom
the blame or the punishment of a
pernicious measure or series of
pernicious measures ought really to fall
it is shifted from one another with so
much dexterity and under such plausible
appearances that the public opinion is
left in suspense about the real author
the circumstances which may have led to
any national miscarriage or misfortune
are sometimes so complicated that where
there are a number of actors who may
have had different degrees and kinds of
agency though we may clearly see upon
the whole that there has been
mismanagement yet it may be
impracticable to pronounce to whose
account the evil which may have been
incurred is truly chargeable
i was overruled by my counsel the
council were so divided in their
opinions that it was impossible to
obtain any better resolution on the
point
these in similar pretexts are constantly
at hand whether true or false and who is
there that will either take the trouble
or incur the odium of a strict scrutiny
of the secret springs of the transaction
should there be found a citizen zealous
enough to undertake the unpromising task
if there happened to be collusion
between the parties concerned how easy
it is to clothe the circumstances with
so much ambiguity as to render it
uncertain what was the precise conduct
of any of those parties
in the single instance in which the
governor of this state is coupled with a
council that is in the appointment to
offices we have seen the mischiefs of it
in the view now under consideration
scandalous appointments to important
offices have been made some cases indeed
have been so flagrant that all parties
have agreed in the impropriety of the
thing
when inquiry has been made the blame has
been laid by the governor on the members
of the council who on their part have
charged it upon his nomination while the
people remain all together at a loss to
determine by whose influence their
interests have been committed to hansel
unqualified and so manifestly improper
in tenderness to individuals i forbid to
descend to particulars
it is evident from these considerations
that the plurality of the executive
tends to deprive the people of the two
greatest securities they can have for
the faithful exercise of any delegated
power first the restraints of public
opinion which lose their efficacy as
well on account of the division of the
censure attendant on bad measures among
a number as on account of the
uncertainty on whom it ought to fall and
second the opportunity of discovering
with facility and clearness the
misconduct of the persons they trust in
order either to their removal from
office or to their actual punishment in
cases which admit of it
in england the king is a perpetual
magistrate and it is a maxim which has
obtained for the sake of the public
peace that he is unaccountable for his
administration and his person is sacred
nothing therefore can be wiser in that
kingdom than to annex to the king a
constitutional council who may be
responsible to the nation for the advice
they give
without this there would be no
responsibility whatever in the executive
department an idea inadmissible in a
free government
but even there the king is not bound by
the resolutions of his council though
they are answerable for the advice they
give
he is the absolute master of his own
conduct in the exercise of his office
and may observe or disregard the council
given to him at his sole discretion
but in a republic where every magistrate
ought to be personally responsible for
his behavior in office the reason which
in the british constitution dictates the
propriety of a council not only ceases
to apply but turns against the
institution
in the monarchy of great britain it
furnishes a substitute for the
prohibited responsibility of the chief
magistrate which serves in some degree
as a hostage to the national justice for
his good behavior
in the american republic it should serve
to destroy or would greatly diminish the
intended and necessary responsibility of
the chief magistrate himself
the idea of a council to the executive
which has so generally obtained in the
state constitutions has been derived
from that maxim of republican jealousy
which considers power as safer in the
hands of a number of men than of a
single man
if the maxim should be admitted to be
applicable to the case i should contend
that the advantage on that side would
not counterbalance the numerous
disadvantages on the opposite side but i
do not think the rule at all applicable
to the executive power
i clearly concur an opinion in this
particular with a writer whom the
celebrated junius pronounces to be deep
solid and ingenious that the executive
power is more easily confined when it is
one dilom that it is far more safe there
should be a single object for the
jealousy and watchfulness of the people
and in a word that all multiplication of
the executive is rather dangerous than
friendly to liberty
a little consideration will satisfy us
that the species of security sought for
in the multiplication of the executive
is unattainable
numbers must be so great as to render
combination difficult or they are rather
a source of danger than of security
the united credit and influence of
several individuals must be more
formidable to liberty than the credit
and influence of either of them
separately
when power therefore is placed in the
hands of so small a number of men as to
admit of their interests and views being
easily combined in a common enterprise
by an artful leader it becomes more
liable to abuse and more dangerous when
abused than if it be lodged in the hands
of one man who from the very
circumstance of his being alone will be
more narrowly watched and more readily
suspected and who cannot unite so great
a massive influence as when he is
associated with others
the decembers of rome whose name denotes
their number three were more to be
dreaded in their usurpation than any one
of them would have been no person would
think of proposing an executive much
more numerous than that body from six to
a dozen have been suggested for the
number of the council
the extreme of these numbers is not too
great for an easy combination and from
such a combination america would have
more to fear than from the ambition of
any single individual a council to a
magistrate who is himself responsible
for what he does are generally nothing
better than a clog upon his good
intentions are often the instruments and
accomplices of his bad and are almost
always a cloak to his faults
i forbade to dwell upon the subject of
expense though it'd be evident that if
the council should be numerous enough to
answer the principal end aimed at by the
institution the salaries of the members
who must be drawn from their homes to
reside at the seat of government would
form an item in the catalog of public
expenditures too serious to be incurred
for an object of equivocal utility i
will only add that prior to the
appearance of the constitution i rarely
met with an intelligent man from any of
the states who did not admit as the
result of experience that the unity of
the executive of this state was one of
the best of the distinguishing features
of our constitution
publius